Hi, everybody. Thank you so much for coming. I really, really appreciate it. I've been
doing some very exciting work, and I'm really even more excited to share it with you all
today. So I'm Alan Dipert. I work at RStudio. Like Barrett, I'm on the Shiny team. And I've
had the pleasure over the past few months of working on this problem of integrating
React, the JavaScript library, with Shiny. I believe that for quite some time, people
in the Shiny community have been interested in React and about ways to integrate with
Shiny, and so this work was initiated in an effort to bridge that gap somehow. And we've
been at it for a few months, and we have work to show, which is why I'm here and why I'm
so excited. But some questions and problems remain unsolved, and that's sort of where
you come in. So I would encourage you, if you're at all interested in any of this, to
follow up with me afterwards. There may or may not be time for questions, but I'm always
happy to talk about this stuff, and we can talk shop and discuss why you're interested
in the context that you're interested in, because I think that this could be the start
of a really fun and exciting little niche thing in the Shiny ecosystem.
So without further ado, let's start with a motivating problem, I guess. A problem slash
demo. So like many of you, I'm online, I'm on the web, I surf the web, and you come across
things that are awesome, and the only problem with them is that they don't have an HTML
widget or they're otherwise not accessible from R. So one of these things that I ran
across was a React-based library called Mapbox GL. Mapbox is a company, they make a library
called Mapbox GL, which is very similar to Leaflet, but it has some interesting properties.
In particular, it's highly themable. So let me show you some of the demos of this thing.
So this is a very nice Leaflet-esque map, but of course we can do heat maps, pretty
fancy, and you can switch between these. The thing that's governing the colors of the roads
and the city and county titles and stuff, that's all governed by one of these Mapbox
style objects, and then on the left-hand side here we've got the heap of JavaScript code
involved in rendering that. Probably my most favorite one is the Superman mode one, where
you literally fly around. Right? So just to be clear, I didn't make this, but I think
it's awesome, and this is the kind of thing that I think gets me excited when I'm able
to use it from R. So what I did is I, in the course of not too long, maybe an hour
or two, using the tools I'm about to explain to you, I was able to make my own HTML widget
that provides a subset of the functionality we just saw and delivers it to us as an R
HTML widget, and so I became aware early in the conference that the most important thing
to keep in mind about here in Austin are tacos. So there's this, it's trending, has
been trending, someone named Caitlin Houdon, I hope I got that right, who I haven't met
apparently, posted on Twitter a list of her five favorite places, and then in our studio
person Thomas Mock, he made a shiny dashboard using a leaflet map, and I thought, hey, in
keeping with the tradition of taco enthusiasm, I should make some kind of taco app. So here
we are. I've got some taco joints loaded up into a data frame, and I'm displaying them
with a data table here, and then over here I've got taco locations with fork and knife
sort of blurry little icons, and then probably the neatest but also most awkward thing I
can do is I can filter this, and after a little bit of burping, it comes back and you can
see that we've filtered what shows up on the map. So like I said, this is like an hour
or two of work. Now, granted, I'm like the world's expert on this weird little library,
so take that with a grain of salt, but like I said, I'm always happy to help you use it.
So this is the promise. This is the kind of thing that I think we can do more of if we
develop these tools that help us bridge the JavaScript ecosystem, particularly the React
ecosystem, with Shiny. Flip back into PowerPoint mode here. Oh, yeah, so there's some recordings
in case there were Internet issues. Okay. So this is the all of the JavaScript code
that I needed to write in order to make go what I just showed you. If you know JavaScript
and are familiar with React, you might have a slight grin or even a smile on your face.
If you don't know JavaScript or don't know React, you might be a little worried at this
point, but don't be. I can assure you that the things you see here can be learned fairly
quickly, and a big part of what we hope to do with this initiative is to build out not
just the code to do that bridging that I mentioned, but also to build out the documentation
and the recommendations around learning JavaScript, leveraging its ecosystem, and all those things
that surround JavaScript development to make them more accessible to people who don't have
that experience. So this is the extent of the code that does
the adapting of the React library I just showed to Shiny world, and, yeah, I think it's like
11 lines of code. I don't know. Is anyone surprised at how small this is or disgusted
by how big it is? Show of hands. Okay. My meme game is usually very weak, but I put
this one in, and it seems to have gone well. So if you're the kind of person who would
prefer to ignore me for the next 15 minutes and just start hacking, here are the URLs
you need to know about. We have a GitHub organization, React-R, and that's what we call it because
React without the dash R was taken, but if you go there, that's the organization. There
are some example repos, and then there's the React-R package repo itself, and there's also
a link to various other pieces of tutorial documentation. At the bottom, that will take
you directly to our tutorial, which as of right now is the best way to ramp up on this
topic, particularly if you have a little bit of JavaScript background, but if you don't
have that JavaScript background, the rest of the talk is for you.
So we're going to talk about what React is, why it's interesting. We're going to discuss
the core unit of composition in React, the component, and how it's relevant to us. I'm
going to introduce you further to this React-R package, and then I'm going to describe at
a high level the process I went through to make that widget, and then I'll talk a little
bit about what we have in store for the future.
So what is React? Well, it's a JavaScript library for making user interfaces. It was
invented at Facebook around 2011. I believe they used it for the news feed, and then they
bought Instagram, and I think Instagram developed it further, and after Instagram had refined
the idea, they did a wide open source release. So it's quite a mature, even though it wasn't
open source until 2013, it's still quite a mature library and has been used thoroughly.
It supports a functional approach. I think if you know how to write R, you already know
what the functional paradigm is, so I won't elaborate on that, but that's another thing
like React that's trending in the JavaScript ecosystem, but like I said, if you know R,
you're sort of already on board, so I wouldn't worry too much about that paradigm or that
word, and it's oriented around components. I mentioned that the unit of composition in
a React-based application is a component, and finally, they invented a syntax called
JSX that you can think of as a hybrid JavaScript and HTML syntax, and it really does make writing
these kinds of applications quite a bit more concise, and we'll see some of that in a second.
So I think you should care about this for one of two reasons. One, you did like what
I just demonstrated. You're on the Internet, you saw something really cool, you found it,
and nobody's made the HTML widget yet, so you want to be the person to do it. That's
a reason to be interested in React. It has a huge ecosystem with tons of things that
deserve to have their own R wrappers, and I see if everyone in this class learns how
to do this, maybe we could get a significant percentage of the React ecosystem into R.
The other reason might be you're coming from a JavaScript development background, you have
experience with React, and you want to build a React-based library, and maybe adding it
to R isn't like an afterthought for you or would be icing on top, so that's another reason
to be interested in React if you want to go deep on JavaScript.
I should mention also that the reason to go deep on JavaScript with React in particular
is this just wildly, wildly, wildly popular and well-supported by documentation and communities
and so on. OK. So React components. What are they? Very similar to HTML tags. Honestly,
they are I think of them as containers. They contain data hierarchically, so it's sort
of a way to describe a tree. The big difference is that the HTML tags or elements are defined
by a standard, the HTML5 standard is the most recent one, and there's a closed set of tags
and closed set of behaviours for those tags. React components are different because you
can define your own tags or components with their own behaviours that are specific to
your library or application. They contain something called props. You'll see this term
in React documentation. Props are basically a mapping or a named list of keys to values,
and then they can also contain other components, again, because they're hierarchical, and applications
are formed by composing these into a tree of some kind. And then once you finish composing
your components, it's React's responsibility to take this user interface that you've described
using React components and to display it efficiently in the browser.
So this is sort of the minimum viable hello world of React adapted from the Wikipedia
page on React. There are four distinct code chunks. These wouldn't necessarily all appear
in the same file. They could, but they don't have to. The first piece we're looking at
here is the component definition, so a component is a JavaScript class, and here I'm using
newish JavaScript syntax and classes in ES6, and so that's what we're looking at here.
It is JavaScript, and we can see we're naming a component called greeter, and then we can
see that this component extends something else called React.component, and what we're
doing here is establishing a hierarchical relationship. We're saying this new class
greeter should inherit all the behaviour of the super class or parent class React.component.
There's only one required method, the render method, and that method needs to return something,
and in this case, this looks like a syntax error, but it's not. We're in JSX, that special
markup I mentioned, so we're in a world where there's a hybrid JavaScript XML syntax at play,
so what this is doing is effectively returning an instance of the H1 component which is built
into React, and then finally we're interpolating a value into that JSX expression, so if you've
worked with glue or other languages that support string interpolation, that's what
we're looking at. We're slicing data from one context into a template, and this kind
of templating is another reason that JSX is so handy.
Here's some more JSX where we're creating an instance of the greeter class. You can
see the less than sign says we're creating a tag, and greeting is equal to hello world.
This is the place where we assign those props I mentioned, that key value pairs associated
with an instance of an element, and then finally we render the whole thing to the DOM, and
the net effect, like if you were to right click in your browser or look at the elements
in the inspector, you would see there's a div called my app with an H1 hello world.
So that's React in a very small nutshell. React R is a package that has been around
since 2016 by a gentleman named Kent Russell, a really nice guy, and his goal was to figure
out ways to incorporate React and JSX into Shiny applications, and among other things,
the package before we started working on it, it had React HTML dependencies, React and
React DOM, and so it is the canonical place in the R package ecosystem where React stuff
is currently being hung. He also did something really neat in his package.
He embeds V8, the JavaScript engine, to support JSX strings inside R. It's pretty wild, but
it basically means that you can write JSX without installing any JavaScript build tools,
so that's a neat thing, and Kent's done a lot with that.
The enhancements that I'm demonstrating now have a more specific goal than the original
package goal, which is to make HTML widgets in particular easier, and the idea to do this,
it was either Joe or JJ, somebody in our studio before me, identified a symmetry between React's
API and the API of HTML widgets and thought, huh, we have an opportunity here to bridge
these two worlds in maybe an elegant way, or at least a way that would prevent people
from writing lots of code, and the third goal is we want to, like I said, prescribe and
support and document workflows and tool chains for those who are not as intimately familiar
with the JavaScript ecosystem.
So to make an HTML widget using everything I just told you about, you would first scaffold
an R package with the use this package. Use this amazing package. It has a function in
it called create underscore package, and it will build out an empty skeletal package.
Then you can call React R colon colon scaffold React widget while you're inside that package
you just scaffolded, and it will populate with JavaScript build tool configurations
that we will support and condone, and then finally, you do need to install Yarn and Webpack
on your machine, but once you do, then you can install these tools and they'll pick up
that configuration we generated for you, and at the end of the day, you'll have a minimum
viable working HTML widget with React in it.
We do have some remaining work ahead of us, so I would prepare you as you begin on your
React journey that there are some limitations currently. We haven't figured out a really
nice way of sending data or at least supporting widget authors to send data from the browser
context to the R context. This is not impossible right now, and in fact, nothing I'm showing
you was impossible before my talk, because all of it really just was a factor of how
much JavaScript you were willing to write, so this is a case where sending values from
a React base HTML widget to R, not impossible, but as of right now, you're going to need
to write some JavaScript that relies on this existing shiny feature on input change.
We made some interesting prototypes to support this without additional JavaScript, and I
think these ideas hold some promise, so over the coming weeks, days, months, we're going
to be iterating on that, and again, this is why it would be so awesome if you're interested
in this to get involved and try it out and let us know what would feel natural to you,
because at the end of the day, this is all about supporting ease of use and accessibility.
All right. So that's all the material I have prepared. I think I'll have quite a few time
for questions. I would like to make a special thanks to Kent Russell, who's been such a
great package maintainer, and maybe I could call him a friend at this point. I haven't
met him in person. A lot of emails, but I hope he's cool with that. So thank you, Kent.
Thank you all very much.
Thank you.
We do have some time for questions, so let me know, and I'll throw you the ah.
Throw it? I'm going to bean somebody.
Is this how we do it? Okay. It's funny when you go to a talk and it covers something that
you already were dying to learn about. So thank you very much. However, the problem
is that I have a similar mapping library sort of application, but it's from Vue. I'm not
sure how to phrase this. How much work is it to create this React R package, and do
you think it's very likely that something would be recreated for Vue?
So first of all, great point. Second of all, we should hang out. Maybe we can be friends.
Third, we think very highly of Vue within our studio, and I say that's kind of the collective
because I don't have personal experience with it, but we have several experience reports
internally of successes. We chose React initially because there was already an existing package
and someone in the community we could work with on it, and because it seems like, I could
be wrong, but my impression is there are far more available libraries in React world than
in Vue world as of this moment. I could be wrong about that, but that's kind of my impression.
Is that on point?
Oh, no. Right. So to answer that specific technical question, I think there are as few,
if not fewer, technical hurdles in Vue as there are in React. I mentioned the symmetry
between HTML widgets and React. I believe there is that same symmetry based on what
I know right now between HTML widgets and Vue. So it's something we've identified and
we really want to do at some point in the future. Thank you.
Hi. I had a question about there's this library that you guys have called crosstalk. I'm not
sure if you're familiar with it. What it does is if you have some data that you want
to filter on the frontend, you can add a plotly and you can add a data table and you can add
some dropdowns and it does all of those filtering very quickly for you on the frontend. I don't
know if work is being actively done on that package, but when I was looking at the stuff
you were doing with the React, I was wondering if that sort of frontend filtering and aggregation
is something that you guys have planned for Reactor.
So we haven't worked on that specifically, but it is one of our goals to be what I think
of as well-behaved members of the HTML widgets ecosystem. There are some cases where we're
going to sacrifice capabilities for ease of use. So I mentioned that there's a lot of
scaffolding involved to get people going quickly. I think crosstalk is one of those cases where
it would be very difficult for us to scaffold a general approach. So JavaScript would be
involved, but it's certainly not something we would rule out or otherwise make impossible.
So it would always be possible. It just may involve more JavaScript than I showed.
Yes?
Yeah. Would there be any limitations on the React components as to compatibility? For
example, something that does too much in React that you wouldn't be able to support?
Excellent question. Yes. So we made some cuts there, again, in the interest of ease of use.
There are certain things you can do in React that don't really follow from the model that
we advocate. We settle on the model we have because it's a set of conventions for interopting
with React that seem to work for a majority of libraries. There are those edge cases,
and when you hit the edge cases, it's kind of like the crosstalk story. You need to know
JavaScript then at that point. But again, when you do get to that point, our goal is
to at least have examples and documentation to support you as you go that direction in
JavaScript world so that it's never totally inaccessible to you, that you identify while
you're building your widget that that's a step, a bridge you need to cross, and we're
there to hold your hand at least while you do that.